THE ATTRACTION of medieval literature comes perhaps more strongly
from some other countries than from England. In France and Provence,
in Germany and Iceland, there were literary adventurers more daring
and achievements more distinguished. It was not in England that the
most wonderful things were produced; there is nothing in old English
that takes hold of the mind with that masterful and subduing power
which still belongs to the lyrical stanzas of the troubadours and
minnesingers, to Welsh romance, or to the epic prose of the Iceland
histories.  1 The Norman Conquest degraded the English language from
its literary rank, and brought in a new language for the politer
literature. It did not destroy, in one sense it did not absolutely
interrupt, English literature; but it took away the English literary
standard, and threw the country back into the condition of Italy
before Dante--an anarchy of dialects. When a new literary language
was established in the time of Chaucer, the Middle Ages were nearly
over: and so it happened that for the greatest of the medieval
centuries, the twelfth and thirteenth, the centuries of the
Crusades, of the Hohenstaufen Emperors, of St. Francis, St. Dominic,
and St. Louis, there is in English no great representative work in
prose or rhyme. There are better things, it is true, than the
staggering rhythms of Layamon, or the wooden precision of Orm: the
Ancren Riwle is better. But there is no one who can be taken, as
some of the writers in other countries can--Crestien de Troies, for
instance, or Walther von der Vogelweide, or Villehardouin--there is
no one in England who can be taken for a representative poet or
orator, giving out what can be recognised at once, and is recognised
instinctively, as the best possible literary work of its own day and
its own kind. The beauty of medieval poetry and prose is not to be
found in England, or only in a faint reflected way. England did not
possess the heart of the mystery.
